README-BLACK-DON-OS.md, before:

# Black Don OS

A customized NixOS configuration based on [ZaneyOS](https://gitlab.com/zaney/zaneyos) by Don Williams, tailored for multiple host setups with NVIDIA GPU support.

## Overview

Black Don OS is a personalized NixOS configuration that supports multiple host computers with different hardware profiles. It features a modern desktop environment with Hyprland, extensive customization options, and easy multi-host management.

## Features

- 🖥️ **Multi-Host Support** - Easy configuration management for multiple computers
- 🎮 **NVIDIA GPU Optimized** - Full support for NVIDIA graphics with proper drivers
- 🌊 **Hyprland Desktop** - Modern Wayland compositor with beautiful animations
- 🎨 **Stylix Integration** - System-wide theming and styling
- 📦 **Flake-based Configuration** - Reproducible and declarative system management
- 🔧 **Easy Host Setup** - Automated script for adding new computers
- ⚡ **dcli Tool** - Custom CLI utility for multi-host system management

## Current Hosts

- **nixos-leno** - NVIDIA laptop (hybrid graphics)
- **nix-desktop** - NVIDIA desktop (dedicated GPU)

## Quick Start

### Setting Up a New Host

Use the included setup script to easily add new host configurations:

```bash
./setup-new-host.sh
```

This will guide you through:
- Choosing a hostname
- Selecting GPU profile (nvidia, nvidia-laptop, amd, intel, vm)
- Configuring user settings
- Creating installation guide

### Building for a Specific Host

```bash
# Using dcli (recommended)
dcli build nix-desktop      # Build only (no activation)
dcli deploy nix-desktop     # Build and switch

# Using standard nix commands
nixos-rebuild build --flake .#nix-desktop
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nix-desktop
```

### Installing on New Hardware

1. Boot NixOS installer ISO on target computer
2. Follow the host-specific installation guide (e.g., `INSTALL-nix-desktop.md`)
3. Clone this repository and run the installation commands

## Directory Structure

```
black-don-os/
├── hosts/                    # Host-specific configurations
│   ├── nixos-leno/          # Laptop configuration
│   ├── nix-desktop/         # Desktop configuration
│   └── default/             # Template host
├── profiles/                 # Hardware profiles
│   ├── nvidia/              # Desktop NVIDIA
│   ├── nvidia-laptop/       # Laptop NVIDIA/Intel hybrid
│   ├── amd/                 # AMD graphics
│   ├── intel/               # Intel graphics
│   └── vm/                  # Virtual machine
├── modules/                  # System modules
│   ├── core/                # Core system configuration
│   ├── drivers/             # Hardware drivers
│   └── home/                # Home manager configuration
├── wallpapers/              # Desktop wallpapers
├── setup-new-host.sh        # New host setup script
├── flake.nix               # Main flake configuration
└── INSTALL-*.md            # Host-specific install guides
```

## Host Configuration

Each host has its own directory under `hosts/` containing:

- `default.nix` - Main host imports
- `hardware.nix` - Hardware-specific configuration (generated by nixos-generate-config)
- `variables.nix` - Host-specific settings (monitors, GPU IDs, preferences)
- `host-packages.nix` - Host-specific package list

### Key Settings in `variables.nix`

```nix
{
  # Monitor configuration (host-specific)
  extraMonitorSettings = ''
    monitor=HDMI-A-1,3440x1440@100.0,3330x1444,1.0
    monitor=eDP-1,2560x1600@165.02,6770x1558,1.33
  '';
  
  # GPU IDs for NVIDIA Prime
  intelID = "PCI:34:0:0";
  nvidiaID = "PCI:1:0:0";
  
  # Desktop preferences
  browser = "vivaldi";
  terminal = "kitty";
  stylixImage = ../../wallpapers/Valley.jpg;
}
```

## GPU Profiles

### NVIDIA Desktop (`nvidia`)
- Dedicated NVIDIA GPU
- No hybrid graphics
- Best for gaming desktops

### NVIDIA Laptop (`nvidia-laptop`) 
- NVIDIA + Intel hybrid graphics
- NVIDIA Prime support
- Power-efficient for laptops

### AMD (`amd`)
- AMD Radeon graphics
- Open-source AMDGPU drivers

### Intel (`intel`)
- Intel integrated graphics
- Lightweight and efficient

### VM (`vm`)
- Virtual machine optimized
- Minimal graphics requirements

## Installation Process

### For New Computers

1. **Boot NixOS Installer**
   ```bash
   # Download NixOS ISO and boot from USB
   ```

2. **Basic System Setup**
   ```bash
   # Partition disk, format, mount
   sudo parted /dev/nvme0n1 -- mklabel gpt
   # ... (see host-specific install guide)
   ```

3. **Clone Configuration**
   ```bash
   git clone https://gitlab.com/theblackdon/black-don-os.git
   cd black-don-os
   ```

4. **Generate Hardware Config**
   ```bash
   sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config > ./hosts/YOUR-HOST/hardware.nix
   ```

5. **Install**
   ```bash
   sudo nixos-install --flake .#YOUR-HOST
   ```

### For Existing Systems

Simply switch to a different host configuration:

```bash
# Using dcli (recommended)
dcli deploy nix-desktop

# Using interactive switcher
./switch-host.sh

# Using standard nix commands
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake ~/black-don-os#nix-desktop
```

## Customization

### Adding a New Host

1. Run the setup script: `./setup-new-host.sh`
2. Customize `hosts/NEW-HOST/variables.nix`
3. Test build: `nixos-rebuild build --flake .#NEW-HOST`
4. Commit changes and follow installation guide

### Updating Existing Hosts

1. Edit host-specific files in `hosts/HOST-NAME/`
2. Test changes: `dcli build HOST-NAME`
3. Apply: `dcli deploy HOST-NAME` or `dcli rebuild` (for current host)

### Adding System Packages

- Edit `modules/core/packages.nix` for system-wide packages
- Edit `hosts/HOST/host-packages.nix` for host-specific packages

### Desktop Customization

- Wallpapers: Add to `wallpapers/` and reference in `variables.nix`
- Waybar themes: Choose in `variables.nix` `waybarChoice`
- Animations: Select in `variables.nix` `animChoice`
- Colors: Stylix handles theming from wallpaper

## dcli - Don CLI Utility

Black Don OS includes `dcli`, a custom command-line utility for managing your multi-host setup:

### Common Commands
```bash
dcli help           # Show all commands
dcli list-hosts     # List available hosts
dcli rebuild        # Rebuild current host
dcli update         # Update and rebuild current host
dcli build HOST     # Build specific host (no activation)
dcli deploy HOST    # Deploy to specific host
dcli cleanup        # Clean old generations
dcli switch-host    # Interactive host switcher
```

### Shell Aliases
- `fr` - Fast rebuild (`dcli rebuild`)
- `fu` - Fast update (`dcli update`) 
- `hosts` - List hosts (`dcli list-hosts`)
- `switch` - Host switcher (`dcli switch-host`)

See [dcli.md](dcli.md) for complete documentation.

## Development

### Repository Management

This is a fork of ZaneyOS with personal customizations:

- **Origin**: Your fork at https://gitlab.com/theblackdon/black-don-os.git
- **Upstream**: Original ZaneyOS at https://gitlab.com/zaney/zaneyos.git

### Updating from Upstream

```bash
# Fetch updates from original ZaneyOS
dcli pull           # Pull from your fork
git fetch upstream  # Fetch from original ZaneyOS

# Merge updates (be careful with conflicts)
git merge upstream/stable-2.3
```

### Contributing Changes

1. Make changes in feature branch
2. Test on multiple hosts: `dcli build HOST-NAME`
3. Update documentation
4. Commit and push: `dcli commit "message"` && `dcli push`

## Troubleshooting

### Build Failures

```bash
# Generate diagnostic report
dcli diag

# Show detailed error trace  
nixos-rebuild build --flake .#HOST-NAME --show-trace

# Clean build cache
dcli cleanup
```

### Hardware Detection

```bash
# Find GPU IDs for NVIDIA Prime
lspci | grep VGA

# Generate new hardware config
sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config
```

### Monitor Configuration

```bash
# List available outputs
hyprctl monitors

# Test monitor setup
hyprctl keyword monitor "HDMI-A-1,1920x1080@60,0x0,1"
```

## Credits

- **ZaneyOS**: Original configuration by Don Williams
- **NixOS**: The foundation of this configuration
- **Hyprland**: Wayland compositor
- **Stylix**: System theming
- **Home Manager**: User environment management

## License

Based on ZaneyOS, following the same license terms. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Support

For issues specific to Black Don OS customizations:
- Check host-specific installation guides
- Review the troubleshooting section
- Refer to the original ZaneyOS documentation for base functionality

---

*Happy computing with Black Don OS! 🚀*

Commit message:

Clean up unused ZaneyOS hosts (nixstation, zaneyos-23-vm)

README-BLACK-DON-OS.md, after:

# Black Don OS

A customized NixOS configuration based on [ZaneyOS](https://gitlab.com/zaney/zaneyos) by Don Williams, tailored for multiple host setups with NVIDIA GPU support.

## Overview

Black Don OS is a personalized NixOS configuration that supports multiple host computers with different hardware profiles. It features a modern desktop environment with Hyprland, extensive customization options, and easy multi-host management.

## Features

- 🖥️ **Multi-Host Support** - Easy configuration management for multiple computers
- 🎮 **NVIDIA GPU Optimized** - Full support for NVIDIA graphics with proper drivers
- 🌊 **Hyprland Desktop** - Modern Wayland compositor with beautiful animations
- 🎨 **Stylix Integration** - System-wide theming and styling
- 📦 **Flake-based Configuration** - Reproducible and declarative system management
- 🔧 **Easy Host Setup** - Automated script for adding new computers
- ⚡ **dcli Tool** - Custom CLI utility for multi-host system management

## Current Hosts

- **nixos-leno** - NVIDIA laptop (hybrid graphics)
- **nix-desktop** - NVIDIA desktop (dedicated GPU)

*Note: Cleaned up from original ZaneyOS - removed unused nixstation and zaneyos-23-vm hosts*

## Quick Start

### Setting Up a New Host

Use the included setup script to easily add new host configurations:

```bash
./setup-new-host.sh
```

This will guide you through:
- Choosing a hostname
- Selecting GPU profile (nvidia, nvidia-laptop, amd, intel, vm)
- Configuring user settings
- Creating installation guide

### Building for a Specific Host

```bash
# Using dcli (recommended)
dcli build nix-desktop      # Build only (no activation)
dcli deploy nix-desktop     # Build and switch

# Using standard nix commands
nixos-rebuild build --flake .#nix-desktop
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nix-desktop
```

### Installing on New Hardware

1. Boot NixOS installer ISO on target computer
2. Follow the host-specific installation guide (e.g., `INSTALL-nix-desktop.md`)
3. Clone this repository and run the installation commands

## Directory Structure

```
black-don-os/
├── hosts/                    # Host-specific configurations
│   ├── nixos-leno/          # Laptop configuration
│   ├── nix-desktop/         # Desktop configuration
│   └── default/             # Template host
├── profiles/                 # Hardware profiles
│   ├── nvidia/              # Desktop NVIDIA
│   ├── nvidia-laptop/       # Laptop NVIDIA/Intel hybrid
│   ├── amd/                 # AMD graphics
│   ├── intel/               # Intel graphics
│   └── vm/                  # Virtual machine
├── modules/                  # System modules
│   ├── core/                # Core system configuration
│   ├── drivers/             # Hardware drivers
│   └── home/                # Home manager configuration
├── wallpapers/              # Desktop wallpapers
├── setup-new-host.sh        # New host setup script
├── flake.nix               # Main flake configuration
└── INSTALL-*.md            # Host-specific install guides
```

## Host Configuration

Each host has its own directory under `hosts/` containing:

- `default.nix` - Main host imports
- `hardware.nix` - Hardware-specific configuration (generated by nixos-generate-config)
- `variables.nix` - Host-specific settings (monitors, GPU IDs, preferences)
- `host-packages.nix` - Host-specific package list

### Key Settings in `variables.nix`

```nix
{
  # Monitor configuration (host-specific)
  extraMonitorSettings = ''
    monitor=HDMI-A-1,3440x1440@100.0,3330x1444,1.0
    monitor=eDP-1,2560x1600@165.02,6770x1558,1.33
  '';
  
  # GPU IDs for NVIDIA Prime
  intelID = "PCI:34:0:0";
  nvidiaID = "PCI:1:0:0";
  
  # Desktop preferences
  browser = "vivaldi";
  terminal = "kitty";
  stylixImage = ../../wallpapers/Valley.jpg;
}
```

## GPU Profiles

### NVIDIA Desktop (`nvidia`)
- Dedicated NVIDIA GPU
- No hybrid graphics
- Best for gaming desktops

### NVIDIA Laptop (`nvidia-laptop`) 
- NVIDIA + Intel hybrid graphics
- NVIDIA Prime support
- Power-efficient for laptops

### AMD (`amd`)
- AMD Radeon graphics
- Open-source AMDGPU drivers

### Intel (`intel`)
- Intel integrated graphics
- Lightweight and efficient

### VM (`vm`)
- Virtual machine optimized
- Minimal graphics requirements

## Installation Process

### For New Computers

1. **Boot NixOS Installer**
   ```bash
   # Download NixOS ISO and boot from USB
   ```

2. **Basic System Setup**
   ```bash
   # Partition disk, format, mount
   sudo parted /dev/nvme0n1 -- mklabel gpt
   # ... (see host-specific install guide)
   ```

3. **Clone Configuration**
   ```bash
   git clone https://gitlab.com/theblackdon/black-don-os.git
   cd black-don-os
   ```

4. **Generate Hardware Config**
   ```bash
   sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config > ./hosts/YOUR-HOST/hardware.nix
   ```

5. **Install**
   ```bash
   sudo nixos-install --flake .#YOUR-HOST
   ```

### For Existing Systems

Simply switch to a different host configuration:

```bash
# Using dcli (recommended)
dcli deploy nix-desktop

# Using interactive switcher
./switch-host.sh

# Using standard nix commands
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake ~/black-don-os#nix-desktop
```

## Customization

### Adding a New Host

1. Run the setup script: `./setup-new-host.sh`
2. Customize `hosts/NEW-HOST/variables.nix`
3. Test build: `nixos-rebuild build --flake .#NEW-HOST`
4. Commit changes and follow installation guide

### Updating Existing Hosts

1. Edit host-specific files in `hosts/HOST-NAME/`
2. Test changes: `dcli build HOST-NAME`
3. Apply: `dcli deploy HOST-NAME` or `dcli rebuild` (for current host)

### Adding System Packages

- Edit `modules/core/packages.nix` for system-wide packages
- Edit `hosts/HOST/host-packages.nix` for host-specific packages

### Desktop Customization

- Wallpapers: Add to `wallpapers/` and reference in `variables.nix`
- Waybar themes: Choose in `variables.nix` `waybarChoice`
- Animations: Select in `variables.nix` `animChoice`
- Colors: Stylix handles theming from wallpaper

## dcli - Don CLI Utility

Black Don OS includes `dcli`, a custom command-line utility for managing your multi-host setup:

### Common Commands
```bash
dcli help           # Show all commands
dcli list-hosts     # List available hosts
dcli rebuild        # Rebuild current host
dcli update         # Update and rebuild current host
dcli build HOST     # Build specific host (no activation)
dcli deploy HOST    # Deploy to specific host
dcli cleanup        # Clean old generations
dcli switch-host    # Interactive host switcher
```

### Shell Aliases
- `fr` - Fast rebuild (`dcli rebuild`)
- `fu` - Fast update (`dcli update`) 
- `hosts` - List hosts (`dcli list-hosts`)
- `switch` - Host switcher (`dcli switch-host`)

See [dcli.md](dcli.md) for complete documentation.

## Development

### Repository Management

This is a fork of ZaneyOS with personal customizations:

- **Origin**: Your fork at https://gitlab.com/theblackdon/black-don-os.git
- **Upstream**: Original ZaneyOS at https://gitlab.com/zaney/zaneyos.git

### Updating from Upstream

```bash
# Fetch updates from original ZaneyOS
dcli pull           # Pull from your fork
git fetch upstream  # Fetch from original ZaneyOS

# Merge updates (be careful with conflicts)
git merge upstream/stable-2.3
```

### Contributing Changes

1. Make changes in feature branch
2. Test on multiple hosts: `dcli build HOST-NAME`
3. Update documentation
4. Commit and push: `dcli commit "message"` && `dcli push`

## Troubleshooting

### Build Failures

```bash
# Generate diagnostic report
dcli diag

# Show detailed error trace  
nixos-rebuild build --flake .#HOST-NAME --show-trace

# Clean build cache
dcli cleanup
```

### Hardware Detection

```bash
# Find GPU IDs for NVIDIA Prime
lspci | grep VGA

# Generate new hardware config
sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config
```

### Monitor Configuration

```bash
# List available outputs
hyprctl monitors

# Test monitor setup
hyprctl keyword monitor "HDMI-A-1,1920x1080@60,0x0,1"
```

## Credits

- **ZaneyOS**: Original configuration by Don Williams
- **NixOS**: The foundation of this configuration
- **Hyprland**: Wayland compositor
- **Stylix**: System theming
- **Home Manager**: User environment management

## License

Based on ZaneyOS, following the same license terms. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Support

For issues specific to Black Don OS customizations:
- Check host-specific installation guides
- Review the troubleshooting section
- Refer to the original ZaneyOS documentation for base functionality

---

*Happy computing with Black Don OS! 🚀*
