cheatsheets/README.md, before:

# Cheatsheets Index (ddubsOS)

These documents cover both general usage and the specific configuration as defined in the NixOS configuration "ddubsOS".

- General use: Practical, task-focused tips and top workflows.
- ddubsOS specifics: Notes reflecting how tools are configured in this repository (modules/home/*) so behavior matches your system.

## 🔗 Quick Links
- Emacs
  - [Getting Started Top 10](emacs/emacs.getting-started.top10.md)
  - [File Explorer](emacs/emacs.file-explorer.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Code Completion](emacs/emacs.code-completion.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Magit (Git)](emacs/emacs.magit.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Markdown](emacs/emacs.markdown.cheatsheet.md)
- Ghostty
  - [Ghostty Cheatsheet](ghostty/ghostty.cheatsheet.md)
- Tmux
  - [Tmux Cheatsheet](tmux/tmux.cheatsheet.md)
- Alacritty
  - [Alacritty Cheatsheet](alacritty/alacritty.cheatsheet.md)
- Kitty
  - [Kitty Cheatsheet](kitty/kitty.cheatsheet.md)
- WezTerm
  - [WezTerm Cheatsheet](wezterm/wezterm.cheatsheet.md)
- Hyprland
  - [Keybindings](hyprland/hyprland.binds.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Window Rules](hyprland/hyprland.windowrules.cheatsheet.md)
- Yazi
  - [Keymap](yazi/yazi.keymap.cheatsheet.md)

## 📚 How to use
- Browse the area you care about (e.g., Emacs, Ghostty).
- Start with the “getting started” or “top tips” docs for quick wins.
- Refer to tool-specific cheatsheets for day-to-day commands, then cross-check any ddubsOS-specific settings.

## 📂 Directory Tree

```
cheatsheets/
├── emacs/
│   ├── emacs.code-completion.cheatsheet.md
│   ├── emacs.file-explorer.cheatsheet.md
│   ├── emacs.getting-started.top10.md
│   ├── emacs.magit.cheatsheet.md
│   └── emacs.markdown.cheatsheet.md
├── ghostty/
│   └── ghostty.cheatsheet.md
├── tmux/
│   └── tmux.cheatsheet.md
├── alacritty/
│   └── alacritty.cheatsheet.md
├── kitty/
│   └── kitty.cheatsheet.md
├── wezterm/
│   └── wezterm.cheatsheet.md
├── hyprland/
│   ├── hyprland.binds.cheatsheet.md
│   └── hyprland.windowrules.cheatsheet.md
└── yazi/
    └── yazi.keymap.cheatsheet.md
```

## 🛠️ Notes
- Ghostty cheatsheet reflects bindings from modules/home/terminals/ghostty.nix (ddubsOS).
- Emacs docs follow the same markdown style for consistency and quick scanning.

Commit message:

Update cheatsheets and README: rebrand to Black Don OS, add modular features
- Updated all cheatsheets to use Black Don OS branding instead of ZaneyOS/ddubsOS
- Changed zcli references to dcli throughout documentation
- Updated repository paths from ~/zaneyos to ~/black-don-os
- Enhanced README features section with modular toggles, per-host customization, and Vicinae launcher
- Updated README overview to highlight modularity and customization capabilities
- Changed new user install flow to use bdos-1.0 branch instead of main

cheatsheets/README.md, after:

# Cheatsheets Index (Black Don OS)

These documents cover both general usage and the specific configuration as defined in the NixOS configuration "Black Don OS".

- General use: Practical, task-focused tips and top workflows.
- Black Don OS specifics: Notes reflecting how tools are configured in this repository (modules/home/*) so behavior matches your system.

## 🔗 Quick Links
- Emacs
  - [Getting Started Top 10](emacs/emacs.getting-started.top10.md)
  - [File Explorer](emacs/emacs.file-explorer.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Code Completion](emacs/emacs.code-completion.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Magit (Git)](emacs/emacs.magit.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Markdown](emacs/emacs.markdown.cheatsheet.md)
- Ghostty
  - [Ghostty Cheatsheet](ghostty/ghostty.cheatsheet.md)
- Tmux
  - [Tmux Cheatsheet](tmux/tmux.cheatsheet.md)
- Alacritty
  - [Alacritty Cheatsheet](alacritty/alacritty.cheatsheet.md)
- Kitty
  - [Kitty Cheatsheet](kitty/kitty.cheatsheet.md)
- WezTerm
  - [WezTerm Cheatsheet](wezterm/wezterm.cheatsheet.md)
- Hyprland
  - [Keybindings](hyprland/hyprland.binds.cheatsheet.md)
  - [Window Rules](hyprland/hyprland.windowrules.cheatsheet.md)
- Yazi
  - [Keymap](yazi/yazi.keymap.cheatsheet.md)

## 📚 How to use
- Browse the area you care about (e.g., Emacs, Ghostty).
- Start with the “getting started” or “top tips” docs for quick wins.
- Refer to tool-specific cheatsheets for day-to-day commands, then cross-check any ddubsOS-specific settings.

## 📂 Directory Tree

```
cheatsheets/
├── emacs/
│   ├── emacs.code-completion.cheatsheet.md
│   ├── emacs.file-explorer.cheatsheet.md
│   ├── emacs.getting-started.top10.md
│   ├── emacs.magit.cheatsheet.md
│   └── emacs.markdown.cheatsheet.md
├── ghostty/
│   └── ghostty.cheatsheet.md
├── tmux/
│   └── tmux.cheatsheet.md
├── alacritty/
│   └── alacritty.cheatsheet.md
├── kitty/
│   └── kitty.cheatsheet.md
├── wezterm/
│   └── wezterm.cheatsheet.md
├── hyprland/
│   ├── hyprland.binds.cheatsheet.md
│   └── hyprland.windowrules.cheatsheet.md
└── yazi/
    └── yazi.keymap.cheatsheet.md
```

## 🛠️ Notes
- Ghostty cheatsheet reflects bindings from modules/home/terminals/ghostty.nix (Black Don OS).
- Emacs docs follow the same markdown style for consistency and quick scanning.
